---
layout: post
title: Using a commercially available biosensor to investigate the gluten content of food samples
date: 2017-02-13 09:43:25
categories: BME
summary: The experiment was carried out using Glutentox Home Kit to identify whether gluten is present in biscuit crumbs or the sample flour. The objectives for this experiment is to gain hands on experience of using a biosensor, to better understand the theoretical and technical aspects of a novel biosensor design, as well as bio-recognition elements, transducer and signal processing.  

---

The experiment was carried out to detect if there is gluten in given samples. A simple lateral flow device (LFD) was used, drops of sample solutions were added using pipettes to LFD, and positive results were shown from two of the samples. During the experiment, hands on experience of using a biosensor was achieved, as well as the understanding of the theoretical and technical aspects of a novel biosensor design. A clearer understanding of the bio-recognition elements, transducer and signal processing was archived from the background research on the topic. The aspects of biosensors and the difference between biosensors and biomedical sensors are understood, as well as the principle of how a Lateral Flow Device works, and the importance of Surface Plasmon Resonance in Biosensor Development.### BiosensorsA biosensor is an analytical device, used for the detection of an analyte, that combines a biological component with a physio-chemimcal detector. It converts a biological response into an electrical signal, by having a bio-receptor and transducer, and signal processor, the completed association between biosensor reader and electronics are primarily responsible for the display of the results in a user-friendly way. The applications of biosensors would include glucose monitoring, microbial biosensors, ozone biosensors and metastatic cancer cell biosensors.### Biomedical SensorsHowever, a biomedical sensor is a sensor designed and configured for use in the biomedical regime, it may be a physical or chemical sensor, it is designed to be safe and to meet standards of testing and evaluation for use on people. The applications of biomedical sensors include the following: blood pressure, heart rate, respiration, as well as the corresponding chemical sensors for pO2, SvO2 and Lipids. Biomedical sensors are widely used in many areas, for instance, drug delivery, gastroenterology, neurology and many more. ### Biosensors vs. Biomedical SensorsThe difference between biosensors and biomedical sensors is that biomedical sensors are used specifically in biomedical applications, whereas biosensors’ target can be biological, chemical and physical.### Components in BiosensorsThe three main components of biosensors are: 1.	Biological elements2.	Transducer3.	Signal processor The main purpose of biosensors is to conduct quantitative analysis of various substances by converting the biological actions in to measurable signals [1].The biological element is the element that can interact with target analyte, for example, tissue enzymes. Enzymes are acting as a bioreceptor, and they rae capable of recognising a specific target molecule. Antibodies, nucleic acids are the comment bioreceptors. The biological component recognises and interacts with the analyte to produce a physical change (a signal) that can be detected, by the transducer.Transducers can convert the recognised events into measurable signals and can be more easily quantified.

And the final step is that signal processor that can display the results, for easy interpretation. ### Gluten As a mixture of proteins found in wheat and grains, the specific molecule that’s present in gluten is Prolamin, and can be divided into two main components: gliadins and glutenins. [2]### The Experiment ### Apparatus Glutentox Home Gluten Test Kit•	Extraction solution•	Dilution solution•	Spoon•	Pipettes•	Gluten Biosensor The procedure was carried out by following the steps:1.	Use the spoon with levelled amounts of samples and add the content to the extraction bottle 2.	Shake the bottle vigorously to make sure the solution is well mixed3.	Use the pipette, adding 5-6 drops from dilution bottle to the S zone on the sensor4.	Wait 10 minutes for the resultsBiscuit crumb and flour were given as testing samples, small spoons are provided, to get same amount of each samples for the experiment. ### TestingDuring the experiment, separate pipettes are used to prevent contamination between samples, as the image shown below. As the prolamin molecules are only present in gluten, in the Glutentox Home sensor, an antibody G12 is to target this molecule. The G12 antibody created to target specific gluten molecule, it recognises gluten in wheat, barley, rye and some strains of oat [3].Based on the steps provided on the lab sheet, the purpose of the liquid inside extraction bottle is to dissolve solvent in order to form a well-mixed solution, by shaking the bottle vigorously. By adding solutions to the dilution bottle,  the solution is diluted, the purpose of doing so is to control the concentration of analyte that is to be detected. At the same time, it is also to make sure that the concentration of the sample is within the range of Glutentox Home Kit – 5ppm to 20ppm [3].### ResultsIn comparison to the test indicator guide, all three tests are valid. 